>>> ON THIS EDITION OF SUNDAY,
SEPTEMBER 29th, ALL SIGNS AR
POINTING TO A FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN
WE'LL HAVE THE LATEST.
>> THERE'S NOT A WHOLE LOT
HAPPENING BEHIND THE SCENES.
LEADERSHIP IN BOTH PARTIES ARE
NOT REALLY HAVING CONVERSATION
WITH THE WHITE HOUSE
ALL WEEKEND THIS WAS MORE AN
ISSUING OF STATEMENTS BACK AND
FORTH.
THE PRESIDENT HAD A VETO THREA
OF WHAT THE HOUSE PASSED
SATURDAY NIGHT
>> IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SHOULD UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS
BENEFIT FROM LOWER IN-STAT
COLLEGE TUITION RATES?
>> WE HAVE PEOPLE STRUGGLING
THAT ARE HARD-WORKING CITIZENS
NEW JERSEY CITIZENS, WHERE D
THEY FIT INTO THIS
>>> AND HELPING CONSUMERS MAKE
SENSE OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>> THIS IS "PBS NEWSHOU
WEEKEND.
>> GOOD EVENING, I'M HAR
SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE BUDGET IMPASSE CONTINUES AND
A FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN IS
NOW SET TO BEGIN IN A LITTLE
MORE THAN 24 HOURS
TODAY, A TOP DEMOCRAT SAID THE
PARTIAL SHUTDOWN IS ALL BU
CERTAIN.
>> WE KNOW WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN
TOMORROW THE SENATE WILL COME IN
SESSION, THE HOUSE POSITION,
WHICH IS BASICALLY THE SAME ON
THEY SENT US THE LAST TIME, IS
GOING TO BE REJECTED AGAIN AND
WE'RE GOING TO FACE THE PROSPECT
OF THE GOVERNMENT SHUTTING DOW
COME MIDNIGHT MONDAY NIGHT
TUESDAY MORNING.
>> DURBIN WARNED A GOVERNMEN
CLOTURE WOULD CREATE HARDSHIPS
AND JEOPARDIZE THE SNAGS'S
ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND BLAMED
HOUMGS REPUBLICANS FOR TYING THE
FATE OF THE BUDGET TO THE HEALTH
CARE REFORM.
>> IF THERE'S TO BE
CONSTRUCTIVE CONVERSATION ABOU
THE FUTURE OF HEALTH CAR
REFORM, IT'S GOING FORWARD
I FULLY SUPPORT THAT, BUT LET'
SIT DOWN IN A BIPARTISAN AND
CALM WAY, NOT WITH THE PROSPEC
OF SHUTTING DOWN THE GOVERNMEN
OR SHUTTING DOWN THE ECONOMY
>> THE FIRST PORTION OF TH
DIVIDED QUESTION IS ADOPTED.
>> THIS MORNING, THE HOUSE ONC
AGAIN PASSED A BUDGET THAT WOULD
CURB THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
THE SENATE ALREADY REJECTED TH
IDEA FRIDAY AND EVEN BEFORE TH
HOUSE RESTORED IT EARLY THIS
MORNING, HARRY REID SAID THE
HOUSE VERSION OF THE BILL HAD NO
CHANCE IN THE SENATE
REID DID NOT CALL THE SENATE
BACK INTO SESSION TODAY, A MOV
RIDICULED BY HOUSE REPUBLICA
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
IN A STATEMENT, BOEHNER SAID, IF
THE SENATE STALLS UNTIL MONDAY
AFTERNOON INSTEAD OF WORKING
TODAY, IT WOULD BE AN ACT OF
BREATHTAKING ARROGANCE BY TH
SENATE DEMOCRATIC LEADERSHIP
I CALL ON THE DEMOCRATIC LEADERS
OF THE SENATE TO ACT TODAY O
THE MEASURE PASSED BY THE HOUS
LAST NIGHT AND URGE SENATORS O
BOTH SIDES
AISLE TO LISTEN TO THE AMERICA
PEOPLE WHO DO NOT WANT A
SHUTDOWN OR THE PRESIDENT'
HEALTH CARE LAW.
TEXAS REPUBLICAN SENATOR TED
CRUZ ALSO BLAMED REID FOR TH
IMPENDING GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
>> IF HARRY REID CAUSES
SHUTDOWN, THAT WOULD BE
MISTAKE.
BUT THAT IS HIS POSITION
>> SO WHERE'S IT GO FROM HERE?
WE'RE JOINED FROM WASHINGTON B
CHRISTINA.
WHILE WE'VE SEEN ALL THE TALK ON
THE SUNDAY MORNING SHOWS, WHAT'S
HAPPENING BEHIND THE SCENES, I
ANYTHING
>> THERE'S NOT A WHOLE LOT
HAPPENING BEHIND THE SCENES.
LEADERSHIP IN BOTH PARTIES ARE
NOT REALLY HAVING CONVERSATION
WITH THE WHITE HOUSE
ALL WEEKEND THIS WAS MORE AN
ISSUING OF STATEMENTS BACK AND
FORTH.
THE PRESIDENT HAD A VETO THREA
OF WHAT THE HOUSE PASSED
SATURDAY NIGHT VERY LATE IN TH
EVENING.
AND HARRY REID, THE SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER, SAID THEY WOULD
ABSOLUTELY NOT ACCEPT WHAT THE
HOUSE PASSED
SO EVERYBODY IS WAITING FOR TH
SENATE TO RETURN TO WASHINGTON
AND COME INTO SESSION ON MONDA
AT 2:00.
>> WHAT HAPPENS AT 2:00?
FIRST, WITH THE SENATE AND THE
THE HOUSE AND MAYBE THE WHIT
HOUSE.
>> WHAT HARRY REID WILL DO I
NOT ACCEPT ANY CHANGES TO TH
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW.
THERE WERE REALLY THREE THINGS
THAT THE HOUSE DID ON SATURDAY
NIGHT.
THE SENATE WILL BE ABLE TO
DISPATCH OF THOSE THROUGH
COUPLE OF PROCEDURAL VOTES, EVEN
THOUGH THERE'S REPUBLICA
SUPPORT FOR A FEW AND HOUS
REPUBLICANS ARE SAYING SOM
SENATE DEMOCRATS MIGHT BE ABLE
TO SUPPORT SOME OF THE CHANGES
TO THE HEALTH CARE LAW
THAT'S NOT GOING TO HAPPEN
SO THEN YOU END UP HAVING TH
SENATE PASS A BILL THAT WOUL
ALLOW THE TROOPS TO CONTINUE T
GET PAYCHECKS IN THE EVENT OF
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
EVERYBODY SAYS THAT'S LIKELY T
PASS TO PROTECT THE TROOPS, THEN
YOU'LL HAVE THEM PROBABLY SEND
YET ANOTHER BILL TO FUND THE
GOVERNMENT BACK TO THE HOUSE
MEANWHILE, THE CLOCK CONTINUES
TO TICK.
THERE WILL ONLY BE TEN HOURS
LEFT UNTIL A SHUTDOWN WHEN THE
SENATE COMES IN.
>> SAY A SHUTDOWN HAPPENS.
HOW DOES CONGRESS UNDO IT OR GET
OVER IT AND CREATE SOME SORT O
A STOPGAP MEASURE?
>> WELL, THERE'S NOT A LOT THE
CAN DO
THEY COULD PASS A NEW BILL T
FUND THE GOVERNMENT FOR A FE
DAYS OR A WEEK
AGAIN, YOU KEEP HEARING THIS
TERM "CLEAN CONTINUING
RESOLUTION," MEANING IT DOESN'
HAVE POLICY ATTACHED TO IT, JUST
A MATTER OF FUNDING TH
GOVERNMENT TO KEEP IT GOING.
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF INTEREST IN
DOING THAT BECAUSE THERE'S S
LITTLE TIME, SO THEY WANT TO
WORK SOMETHING OUT
AGAIN, IT'S A PRETTY SHORT-TER
BILL
RIGHT NOW, THE HOUSE PASSED
MEASURE TO FUND THE GOVERNMENT
THROUGH DECEMBER 15th, ON FRIDAY
THE BILL FUNDED THROUGH NOVEMBER
15th
>> ALSO, HOW DOES THIS TIE INT
THE DEBT CEILING
WE HAVE THAT OTHER DEADLINE IN
MID-OCTOBER, THAT'S MUCH EARLIER
THAN THESE NOVEMBER AND DECEMBER
DEADLINES THESE GUYS ARE TALKING
ABOUT.
>> WHAT HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER REALLY WANTED HERE WAS
TO USE THAT ARGUMENT, THE DEBT
CEILING ARGUMENT, TO NEGOTIATE
WITH THE PRESIDENT ABOUT A
BIGGER SERIES OF CUTS, ABOUT
CHANGES TO THE PRESIDENT'S
HEALTH CARE LAW, DELAYING IT
AND HIS CONSERVATIVE MEMBERS
REALLY SAW WHAT SENATOR TED CRUZ
WAS ABLE TO DO ON THE SENATE
FLOOR AND GENERATE A LOT O
NATIONAL ATTENTION, REALLY
CAPITALIZE ON THE ANTIHEALTH
CARE SENTIMENT IN THE NATION, SO
THEY SAID THIS IS OUR MOMENT
LET'S HAVE THIS FIGHT HERE
THEY WANT TO POSSIBLY SHUT THE
GOVERNMENT DOWN, AS WE'R
TALKING ABOUT, IN THIS FIGHT
IN THAT DEBT CEILING FIGHT
WHICH WILL HAPPEN NO MATTE
WHAT, THE GOVERNMENT WILL REAC
THAT DEBT CEILING ON OCTOBER
17th
THEY ARE TRYING TO ATTACH OTHE
THINGS TO IT
THE PRESIDENT SAYS HE WON'
NEGOTIATE THERE.
THE REPUBLICANS ARE TRYING T
SAY, WELL, YOU NEGOTIATED WITH
US PREVIOUSLY ON THIS SAME
ISSUE.
>> IT COMES DOWN TO A COUPLE O
CENTRAL CHARACTERS
WHERE DOES THIS LEAVE TH
PRESIDENT AND ALSO JOHN BOEHNER?
>> I THINK YOU'LL PROBABLY HEA
FROM THE PRESIDENT BY MONDAY
HE'S GOING TO BE, AGAIN, SAYIN
HE DOESN'T SUPPORT WHAT TH
HOUSE HAS DONE, GOING TO B
SAYING THE SENATE IS THE ONE
THAT PASSED THE BILL THAT HE
SUPPORTS THAT JUST FUNDS THE
GOVERNMENT AND TAKES CARE OF
BASIC SERVICES
JOHN BOEHNER IS GOING TO HAVE TO
MAKE YET ANOTHER DECISION, DOE
HE PUT THIS QUOTE, UNQUOTE
CLEAN CONTINUING RESOLUTION TO
FUND THE GOVERNMENT BEFORE HIS
MEMBERSHIP AND HOPE THAT THE
DEMOCRATS WILL JOIN HIM IN
SUPPORTING THIS AND AVOID
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN?
IT'S NOT IMPOSSIBLE FOR THIS T
HAPPEN BEFORE MIDNIGHT O
MONDAY, BUT IT IS LESS AND LES
LIKELY
>> AND WHAT ARE YOU HEARING FROM
STAFFERS
ARE THEY OPTIMISTIC SOMETHIN
CAN BE WORKED OUT?
ARE THEY JUST ENJOYING A
BEAUTIFUL SUNDAY AND SAYING THIS
IS GOING TO BE A HORRIBL
MONDAY
>> NO, EVERYBODY'S WORKING
AROUND THE CLOCK ON THIS
THEY ARE TRYING TO HAVE SOME
SORT OF SOLUTION, AND THERE'S
LOT OF TALKING POINTS GOING BACK
AND FORTH.
THE BOTTOM LINE, A LOT O
CAPITAL HILL STAFFERS WON'T BE
PAID
THEY WILL BE ABLE TO BE FORCED
ON FURLOUGHS, A LOT OF THING
WILL HAPPEN IN WASHINGTON, D.C
TO EFFECT THE WAY THEY TRY TO DO
THEIR JOBS
>> ALL RIGHT, CHRISTINA FROM
WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH
>> THANK YOU
>>> IN WHAT AMOUNTED TO A BIT OF
BROADCAST DIPLOMACY, SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY SAT DOWN
WITH "60 MINUTES" TODAY TO
DESCRIBE WHAT IT WOULD TAKE FO
IRAN TO AVERT A MILITARY
SHOWDOWN OVER ITS NUCLEA
PROGRAM.
KERRY WAS IN AN INTERVIEW WITH
SCOTT PELLEY, AIRING TONIGHT
>> THEY COULD IMMEDIATELY SHOW A
SECRET FACILITY, UNDERGROUND I
THE MOUNTAINS, FORTIFIED AND
UNQUESTIONABLY NOT SOMETHING
THAT A PEACEFUL PROGRAM WOULD BE
DOING.
THEY COULD OFFER TO CEAS
VOLUNTARILY, TO TAKE ENRICHMEN
ABOVE A CERTAIN LEVEL, KEEP IT
AT A VERY LOW LEVEL, BECAUSE
THERE'S NO NEED TO HAVE IT AT
HIRE LEVEL FOR A PEACEFU
PROGRAM.
A NUMBER OF THINGS, SCOTT.
>> THE UNITED STATES WILL NO
LIFT ECONOMIC SANCTIONS AGAINS
IRAN UNTIL THE IRANIANS PROV
THEY ARE NOT DEVELOPING NUCLEA
WEAPONS.
THE IRANIAN MINISTER SAID IRAN
IS PREPARED TO MAKE ITS NUCLEA
PROGRAM MUCH MORE TRANSPARENT.
>> THE BEST WAY TO ENSURE THAT
IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM WIL
ALWAYS REMAIN PEACEFUL IS TO
MAKE SURE THESE SCIENTISTS
OPERATE IN A FACILITY OR
FACILITIES THAT ARE OBSERVED B
INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS,
MONITORED BY THE INTERNATIONAL
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY -
>> INCLUDING SURPRIS
INSPECTIONS?
>> OH, YEAH.
>> REPORTS GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL
MISSED WARNINGS FROM THEIR OWN
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES BEFORE THE
DEADLY TERRORIST ATTACK LAST
WEEKEND.
KENYAN OFFICIALS TODAY URGED THE
UNITED STATES TO LIFT A TRAVEL
WARNING ISSUED TO U.S. CITIZENS,
FEARING IT WILL DAMAGE THE
COUNTRY'S BILLION-DOLLARS A YEAR
TOURISM INDUSTRY
THE ATTACK LED TO 67 DEATHS,
ANOTHER 60 PEOPLE AR
UNACCOUNTED FOR.
MUSLIM EXTREMISTS RESPONSIBL
FOR ANOTHER TERROR ATTACK IN
NIGERIA.
AUTHORITIES SAY AS MANY AS 5
COLLEGE STUDENTS WERE SHOT DEA
AS THEY SLEPT IN THEIR
DORMITORIES.
THE ATTACK OCCURRED IN A PART OF
A COUNTRY NOW IN A STATE O
EMERGENCY.
NIGERIA IS AFRICA'S MOST
POPULOUS COUNTRY, WITH NEARL
175 MILLION PEOPLE
>>> AN IMPORTANT ECONOMI
DEVELOPMENT TODAY.
IN CHINA, THE OPENING OF A FRE
TRADE ZONE IN SHANGHAI
CHINESE OFFICIALS SAY THE MOVE
WILL EXPOSE SOME CHINESE
BUSINESSES TO FOREIG
COMPETITION.
AMONG THE TWO DOZEN COMPANIE
APPROVED TO BEGIN OPERATIONS
WERE MICROSOFT AND CITI BANK
>>> IMPORTANT MEDICAL NEWS FRO
HOLLAND.
A TOP ONCOLOGIST SAYS AN
EXPERIMENTAL DRUG BEING USED T
TREAT LUNG CANCER PATIENTS I
WHAT SHE CALLED, QUOTE, A GAME
CHANGER.
THE DRUG IS A FORM O
IMMUNOTHERAPY THAT MOBILIZES THE
BODY'S IMMUNE SYSTEM TO FIGH
TUMORS
BURKE AND MEYERS-SQUIB ARE SAI
TO BE DEVELOPING SIMILAR DRUGS
>>> FINALLY, THE OLYMPIC TORCH
WAS LIT TODAY AND ON THE WAY T
SOCHI, RUSSIA.
THE TORCH WAS LIT IN THE CITY OF
OLYMPIA, WHERE THE FIRST OLYMPIC
GAMES WERE BELIEVED TO HAVE BEEN
STAGED IN 776 B.C.
♪♪
>>> OF COURSE, ONE OF THE BI
STICKING POINTS IN THE BUDGE
TALKS IN WASHINGTON IS WHETHER
CONGRESS SHOULD FUND THE
PRESIDENT'S SIGNATURE PIECE OF
LEGISLATION, THE HEALTH CARE
OVERHAUL KNOWN AS THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT
TUESDAY, AS YOU KNOW, IS WHE
INSURANCE EXCHANGES ARE SET TO
OPEN ACROSS THE NATION, BU
THREE AND A HALF YEARS AFTER THE
BILL BECAME LAW, MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS SAY THEY ARE STILL
CONFUSED BY HOW THE LEGISLATIO
WILL AFFECT THEIR LIVES.
TO TRY TO HELP CLARIFY, WE'R
JOINED NOW BY SARA CLIFF
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FIRST OF ALL, EXCHANGES ON
TUESDAY, WHO DOES IT EFFECT?
>> IT'S ACTUALLY A VERY SMAL
GROUP OF AMERICANS
THE WHITE HOUSE EXPECTS THAT
ABOUT 7 MILLION PEOPLE WILL BU
INSURANCE ON THESE NEW EXCHANGES
WHERE PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAV
INSURANCE RIGHT NOW CAN GO AND
COMPARE PLANS AND POTENTIALL
PURCHASE AN OPTION
AND THE PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT
AFFECTED ARE PEOPLE WHO GE
INSURANCE RIGHT NOW THROUG
THEIR EMPLOYER, PEOPLE WHO ARE
ON MEDICARE OR MEDICAID OR A
NUMBER OF OTHER GOVERNMENT
PROGRAMS
>> AND THAT'S THE VAST MAJORIT
OF AMERICANS
>> IT IS
WE'RE ACTUALLY TALKING ABOUT A
PRETTY SMALL SEGMENT OF TH
POPULATION FOR ALL THE DEBAT
WE'RE HAVING HERE IN WASHINGTO
AT THEIR HEIGHT, THE BUDGE
FORECASTERS ESTIMATE THAT ABOU
7% OF AMERICANS WILL USE THESE
EXCHANGES.
SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A SLIVE
OF THE AMERICAN POPULATION
>> AND THIS MIGHT BE A QUESTIO
INTO SORT OF RETAIL PSYCHOLOGY
BUT ARE PEOPLE LIKELY TO SIGN UP
AND PURCHASE SOMETHING SO FAR IN
ADVANCE, BECAUSE THEY DON'
TECHNICALLY HAVE TO HAVE
INSURANCE UNTIL NEXT YEAR,
RIGHT?
>> EVERYONE I TALK TO SAYS THA
THEY ARE NOT, ALTHOUGH THE
EXCHANGES OPEN ON TUESDAY, DON'T
EXPECT A WAVE OF ENROLLMENT.
THE WHITE HOUSE HAS BEEN AGAIN
AND AGAIN IN RECENT WEEKS SAYING
THIS IS A SIX-MONTH OPEN
ENROLLMENT AND OCTOBER 1st I
THE VERY FIRST DAY, BUT WE'R
NOT EXPECTING PEOPLE TO SIGN U
UNTIL MAYBE DECEMBER OR MARC
WHEN OPEN ENROLLMENT ENDS.
>> SO THE ADMINISTRATION HAS
GONE OUT AND MADE THESE SIMPLE
EASY TO UNDERSTAND ANALOGIES
IT'S LIKE COMPARING PRICES O
KAYAK.COM OR EXPEDIA
IS IT AS EASY TO COMPARE HEALT
INSURANCE AND EXCHANGES AS IT IS
TO PURCHASE A PLANE TICKET
>> YOU KNOW, I DON'T THINK I
WILL BE.
AND I THINK THAT MAKES SENSE
BUYING A HEALTH INSURANCE POLICY
IS MORE COMPLEX IN A BIGGE
FINANCIAL DECISION THAN BUYING A
PLANE TICKET SOMEWHERE AND
YOU'RE DEALING WITH COMPLE
TERMS LIKE COPAYMENTS AN
DEDUCTIBLES THAT THE PEOPLE
TALK TO ON THE GROUNDS AND THE
STATES THAT ARE SETTING THIS UP,
THEY SOMETIMES WORRY WHEN WE
COMPARE IT TO A PLANE TICKET
THAT YOU'RE SETTING EXPECTATIONS
TOO HIGH
IT MIGHT TAKE A NUMBER OF PEOPLE
A FEW VISITS TO THE WEBSITE,
THEY MIGHT NEED TO FIN
IN-PERSON HELP
THE EXPECTATION IS IT WILL B
MORE COMPLEX THAN BUYING A PLANE
TICKET
>> AND WHAT'S BEHIND A RECEN
SURGE IN CORPORATIONS USING TH
ACA AS A TOOL TO REDUCE TH
AMOUNT OF COVERAGE THEY AR
PROVIDING THEIR EMPLOYEES?
>> YOU DO SEE THIS A LITTLE BIT.
I WOULDN'T SAY IT'S A SURG
QUITE YET.
BUT YOU SEE LIMITED STORIES,
TRADER JOES, FOR EXAMPLE, TH
GROCERY STORE, DECIDED ITS
PART-TIME EMPLOYEES WILL N
LONGER GET BENEFITS.
THE CALCULUS ON THE PART O
TRADER JOES AND OTHER COMPANIE
IS THAT NOW PEOPLE CAN GET
SUBSIDIZED INSURANCE FROM TH
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND NO ON
WILL BE DENIED COVERAGE FOR
PREEXISTING CONDITION AND THAT
MEANS THEY CAN SHIFT SOME OF
THEIR COSTS TOWARDS THE FEDERA
GOVERNMENT
THERE'S, OBVIOUSLY, A LOT OF
FRUSTRATION WITH THE TRADER JOES
EMPLOYEES, OTHER EMPLOYEES O
COMPANIES THAT HAVE DONE THIS,
BUT I DO THINK YOU'LL SEE MORE
COMPANIES MOVING IN THIS
DIRECTION NOW THAT THE
INDIVIDUAL MARKET DOESN'T HAVE
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS OR WON'
STARTING IN JANUARY.
IT'S A MORE APPEALING PLACE FO
EMPLOYERS TO MOVE SOME OF THEI
WORKERS.
>> AND IS THE EXCHANGE THE PLACE
THAT PEOPLE COULD GO TO GE
ADDITIONAL HELP IF THEY NEED I
OR ADDITIONAL COVERAGE
>> YES
SO IF YOU'RE BUYING INSURANC
FOR YOURSELF, SAY YOU DON'T HAVE
INSURANCE RIGHT NOW OR YOU'RE NO
LONGER GOING TO GET COVERAGE
STARTING ON TUESDAY INDIVIDUAL
CAN GO TO THE MARKETPLACE, THE
CAN CREATE AN ACCOUNT, AND
BASICALLY LOOK AT DIFFEREN
INSURANCE OPTIONS.
IF YOU'RE BELOW A FEDERA
INCOME, THE GOVERNMENT MIGHT
GIVE YOU SUBSIDIES TO HELP BUY
IT TO MAKE INSURANCE MOR
AFFORDABLE
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOININ
US
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME
>>> CHECK TO SEE HOW AFFORDABL
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT IS I
YOUR STATE
USE THE ONLINE COMPARISON AT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
♪♪
>>> AND NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, ORIGINAL, IN-DEPT
STORIES ABOUT IMPORTANT BU
OFTEN UNDERREPORTED TOPICS
THIS EVENING OUR FOCUS IS ON
EDUCATION, ON SOMETHING KNOWN AS
TUITION EQUITY
IT HAS TO DO WITH HOW MUCH
UNDOCUMENTED STUDENTS SHOULD PAY
TO GO TO COLLEGE
SHOULD THEY GET THE SAME
IN-STATE TUITION DISCOUNT THAT
THEIR CLASSMATES RECEIVE
IT IS NOT PART OF EDUCATIO
LEGISLATION NOW STALLED IN
CONGRESS, SO MANY STATES ARE
TACKLING THE ISSUE ON THEIR OWN.
NEW JERSEY IS ONE OF THEM.
"NEWSHOUR" CORRESPONDENT RIC
CARR REPORTS
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO TH
LAW, CYNTHIA CRUZ IS A
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT,
MEXICAN CITIZEN LIVING IN TH
UNITED STATES.
ACCORDING TO CRUZ, NEW JERSEY IS
HOME BECAUSE IT'S WHERE HE
PARENTS BROUGHT HER WHEN SHE
WASN'T EVEN 2 YEARS OLD, AND
MEXICO IS VERY FAR AWAY.
>> I DON'T REMEMBER ANYTHING
ABOUT IT
I DON'T REMEMBER HOW IT LOOKS.
I DON'T REMEMBER WHERE I LIVED
WHERE I WAS BORN, ANYTHING
ALL I KNOW IS THE AMERICAN
CULTURE.
>> Reporter: CRUZ SAYS AMERICA
CULTURE TAUGHT HER THAT THE KE
TO SUCCESS IS EDUCATION.
SO AFTER HIGH SCHOOL, SHE WENT
TO A LAW SCHOOL COMMUNIT
COLLEGE, AND THEN LAST FALL TO
RUTGERS, NEW JERSEY'S FLAGSHIP
PUBLIC UNIVERSITY.
HER GOAL WAS A DEGREE IN PUBLI
POLICY, BUT AFTER ONLY ONE
SEMESTER ON CAMPUS, SHE HAD TO
DROPOUT BECAUSE SHE RAN OUT OF
MONEY.
AS AN UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT
SHE COULDN'T GET FINANCIAL AID
FROM THE STATE, AND SHE HAD TO
PAY HIGHER TUITION THAN OTHE
NEW JERSEY RESIDENTS
IF YOU'RE A RESIDENT OF TH
STATE OF NEW JERSEY, THE TUITION
AND FEES FOR ONE YEAR AS A
FULL-TIME UNDERGRADUATE AT
RUTGERS IS JUST OVER $13,000
IF YOU'RE NOT A RESIDENT, IT'S
GOING TO COST YOU TWICE AS MUCH,
NEARLY $28,000
AND THAT'S THE AMOUNT THAT
STUDENTS WHO ARE UNDOCUMENTE
IMMIGRANTS HAVE TO PAY, EVEN I
THEY LIVED THE VAST MAJORITY O
THEIR LIVES AS RESIDENTS IN TH
STATE OF NEW JERSEY.
THEY SUPPORT A BILL IN THE STATE
LEGISLATURE THAT WOULD ALLOW
THEM TO PAY THE IN-STATE RATE.
THE IDEA IS CALLED TUITION
EQUITY
14 STATES HAVE PASSED SIMILA
LAWS, FROM CONNECTICUT TO NE
YORK IN THE EAST, TO CALIFORNIA,
WASHINGTON, OREGON, AND MOST
RECENTLY COLORADO IN THE WEST.
BUT THERE'S ALSO BEEN
BACKLASH
INDIANA BANNED TUITION EQUITY.
WISCONSIN REPEALED IT.
AND THE TEXAS LAW THAT FIRST
PROVIDED TUITION EQUITY TO
UNDOCUMENTED STUDENTS TURNED
INTO A POLITICAL LIABILITY FOR
GOVERNOR RICK PERRY.
>> I GOT TO BE HONEST WITH YOU
I DON'T SEE HOW IT IS THAT A
STATE LIKE TEXAS, TO GO TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS IF YOU'RE AN
ILLEGAL ALIEN, YOU GET A
IN-STATE TUITION DISCOUNT.
DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH THAT IS
IT'S $22,000 A YEAR.
AND WHY SHOULD THEY BE GIVEN
PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT AS AN
ILLEGAL IN THIS COUNTRY?
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE SAYING
>> CYNTHIA CRUZ SAYS SHE ISN'T
ASKING FOR PREFERENTIA
TREATMENT.
FOR AWHILE AFTER SHE DROPPED OUT
OF SCHOOL, SHE HELD DOWN TWO
JOBS, INCLUDING ONE AT A
CATERING HALL NEAR THE HOME SH
SHARES WITH HER PARENTS.
NOW IT'S ONLY ONE JOB, BUT SHE'S
STILL SAVING MONEY AND HOPIN
SHE CAN RETURN TO RUTGERS.
WHAT WOULD TUITION EQUITY MEAN
TO YOU AND PEOPLE LIKE YOU
>> IT WOULD MEAN SO MUCH
JUST FILLED ME UP WITH SO MUCH
EMOTIONS, TUITION EQUITY
IT WOULD MEAN A WHOLE LOT, I
WOULD MEAN A WHOLE GENERATIO
WOULD BE ABLE TO ATTEND HIGHER
EDUCATION.
THEY'LL BE MAKING THE STEP THA
THEIR PARENTS WEREN'T ABLE TO DO
TO AFFORD SCHOOL, TO BE ABLE T
HAVE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES A
EVERYONE ELSE, AND IT GOES BAC
TO THE HISTORY OF MLK, ROS
PARKS, WHAT THEY WERE FIGHTING
FOR.
>> BUT THEY WERE FIGHTING, ROS
PARKS, MLK, THEY WERE FIGHTING
FOR AMERICAN WHO WERE AMERICAN
CITIZENS
>> YEAH.
>> PEOPLE FOR WHOM THERE WAS N
QUESTION THAT THEIR PARENTS HA
BEEN CITIZENS, THEIR
GRANDPARENTS HAD BEEN CITIZENS
>> YEAH.
>> YOU'RE NOT.
SO WHY SHOULD YOU GET THOS
EQUAL RIGHTS
>> IT'S LIKE WHEN YOU'RE 2
MONTHS AND YOUR PARENTS MAKE A
DECISION, DO WE HAVE THE -- DO
WE HAVE THE CAPACITY TO BE ABL
TO TELL OUR PARENTS WHAT'S RIGHT
FROM WRONG
WE'RE PAYING THE CONSEQUENCES OF
ACTIONS OUR PARENTS TOOK
WE HAVE NO SAY, NOR CHOICE
>> DO I FEEL BAD FOR THAT YOUN
PERSON THAT'S HERE SINCE 2
MONTHS THAT'S STRUGGLING
I FEEL BAD FOR THAT PERSON
BUT I ALSO HAVE TO GO BACK AND
SAY WAIT A SECOND, I REPRESENT
240,000 PEOPLE IN MY DISTRICT.
I'VE GOT PEOPLE STRUGGLING THA
CAN'T MAKE TUITION ALSO THAT ARE
HARD-WORKING NEW JERSE
CITIZENS
WHERE DO THEY FIT INTO THIS?
EVERY ONE OF OUR PUBLI
INSTITUTIONS HAVE NO OPENINGS.
THEY ARE JAM PACKED, SO WHAT A
I DOING FOR THE NEW JERSEY
RESIDENT WHO IS A CITIZEN OF THE
UNITED STATES, AM I KNOCKING
THEM OUT
SORT OF MY CONCERNS ARE WE'R
REALLY TAKING THAT SLOT AWAY
FROM A NEW JERSEY STUDENT.
>> HIS COLLEAGUES IN THE STATE
LEGISLATURE ARE DEBATING TWO
BILLS, ONE WOULD LET
UNDOCUMENTED GRADUATES OF NE
JERSEY HIGH SCHOOL PAY IN-STAT
TUITION IF THEY'VE LIVED IN TH
STATE AT LEAST THREE YEARS
THE OTHER WOULD DO THAT AND MAKE
THEM ELIGIBLE FOR STAT
FINANCIAL AID.
BUT SINGER SAYS THOSE GRANTS ARE
BARELY ABLE TO KEEP UP WITH TH
NEEDS OF STUDENTS WHO AR
ALREADY ELIGIBLE
>> NOW WAIT A SECOND, BY THE
WAY, THERE'S AN INFLUX O
UNDOCUMENTED WE'RE NOW GOING T
APPLY FOR THE SAME GRANTS AN
MONEY YOU'RE GETTING, WHERE YO
MAY NOT GET IT
I CAN'T DEAL WITH THIS
>> SINGER AND ORE OTHE
OPPONENTS SAY THEY'D SUPPORT I
IT IF THERE WAS A PATH T
CITIZENSHIP, SO THEY'D PAY MOR
IN TAXES AND THAT WOULD HELP
OFFSET THE COST OF TUITION
EQUITY
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN HER LIFE
CYNTHIA CRUZ IS PAYING TAXES I
HER OWN NAME
EARLY THIS YEAR SHE GOT A WORK
PERMIT THROUGH AN OBAM
ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM FOR
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS WHO CAME
TO THE U.S. AS CHILDREN.
SHE WANTS TO TAKE THE NEXT STE
ON THE PATH TO CITIZENSHIP A
SOON AS SHE CAN, BUT UNTIL THA
HAPPENS, SHE WANTS TUITION
EQUITY, TOO.
>> COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION
REFORM DOES NOT INCLUDE IN-STATE
TUITION.
IT DOES NOT.
SO WHILE MY APPLICATION IS
PROCESSING, WHAT AM I SUPPOSED
TO DO, NOT GO TO SCHOOL?
I'M STILL GOING TO HAVE TO PAY
OUT OF STATE TUITION
♪♪
>>> THIS IS "PBS NEWSHOU
WEEKEND" SUNDAY.
>>> FINALLY TONIGHT, CHALLENGE
FOR WILDLIFE CONSERVATIONISTS.
LAST WEEK WE CARRIED A REPOR
FROM SOUTH AFRICA BY MARTI
GEISTLER OF IPTV
BUT AS REPORTS THIS WEEK I
NEIGHBORING ZIMBABWE, POACHERS
ARE CONTINUING THEIR ATTACK ON
ELEPHANTS BY POISONING THEM.
>> THIS IS THE LARGEST NATIONA
PARK IN ZIMBABWE AND ONE OF TH
FEW GENUINE TOURIST ATTRACTION
THE COUNTRY HAS LEFT
THE HERDS OF ELEPHANT WHICH ROAM
HERE SHOULD BE PROTECTED, BU
INSTEAD THEY'VE BEEN FALLEN PREY
TO POACHING GANGS, WHO HAV
POISONED THEM FOR THEIR IVORY.
IT'S THOUGHT CYANIDE WAS POURE
INTO THE WATERHOLES THE ANIMAL
DRINK FROM
THEY DIDN'T STAND A CHANCE
THE POACHERS HAVE COME HERE MORE
THAN ONCE OVER RECENT WEEKS.
MORE THAN 80 ELEPHANT CARCASSE
LIE ROTTING IN THE SUN, EACH ONE
WITH ITS TUSKS REMOVED
CONSERVATIONISTS HAVE BEEN
WARNING OF THIS FOR YEARS, SOM
SUSPECT ZIMBABWE'S GOVERNMEN
MAY BE INVOLVED.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF HIGH-U
PEOPLE THAT ARE INVOLVED IN THIS
TYPE OF POACHING THAT IS
ACTUALLY TAKING PLACE.
THERE'S A SYNDICATE HAPPENING.
>> THE GOVERNING PARTY DENIE
ANY INVOLVEMENT.
ON A VISIT TO THE PARK THI
WEEK, THE ENVIRONMENT MINISTER
PROMISED TO GET TOUGH, EVE
THOUGH HE CONCEDED THAT WON'T BE
EASY
>> THEN IT'S NOT JUST OUR LOCA
PEOPLE, BUT THEY ARE SOM
SERIOUS PEOPLE BEHIND IT AND W
NEED TO FLUSH OUT THOS
ELEMENTS
>> CYANIDE COULD POLLUTE THE
LAND, TOO, IT COULD TAKE DECADES
TO DISAPPEAR
DOZENS OF ELEPHANT HAVE DIED S
FAR, BUT IN TIME THE TOLL COUL
BE FAR GREATER THAN THAT
MARTIN GEISTLER, ITV NEWS.
♪♪
>>> ON "THE NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW
ON AIR AND ONLINE, THE LATES
FROM WASHINGTON AS THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN LOOMS.
A REPORT ON RECENT VIOLENC
AGAINST CHRISTIANS IN PAKISTAN
AND ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU VISIT
PRESIDENT OBAMA AT THE WHITE
HOUSE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION O
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND," I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN, THANKS FO
WATCHING
♪♪
>>> BE MORE, PBS